Core Java Interview Questions and Answers

1.What is java?
Java is a simple and most widely used programing language.
Java is fast,reliable and secure

2.Why are we go for java?
Freeware and opensource
It is platform independent i.e program written in one operating system is capable of running in all other operating systems due to bytecode concept.
It runs multiple application at a time.

3.What are the main features of java?

*Java has more features,
1. Platform independent
2. Open source
3. Multithreading
4. More secure
5. Portable

4.What is platform independent?
During the compilation the java program is converted into byte code(not machine specific).
Bytecode can be runned by jvm of any platform.
So code developed in one platform is capable of running in all other platform.

5.What is mean by Open Source?
A program in which source code is available to the general public for use and/or modification
from its original design at free of cost is called open source.

6.What are IDE/tools availabe in market for java?
Notepad
Netbeans
Eclipse
JDeveloper(oracle)
RAD(IBM)
7.What are difference between JDK,JVM,JRE?
JDK:
---- 

Java Development Kit.
If we want to create any applications in java JDK have to be installed in our system.
JDK versions: 1.0 to 1.14.

JRE:
----

Java Runtime Environment.
It is a pre-defined class files (i.e.) library files.

JVM:
----

Java Virtual Machine.
It is mainly used to allocate the memory and compiling.

8.What is mean by oops?
OOPS is Object Oriented Programming Structure.
OOPS is a method of implementation in which programs are organised as collection of objects, class and methods.

9.What are the coding Standard used in java?
Pascal notation: Every word's first letter ,must be a capital letter
Example:GreensTechnology
Camel notation: First word's first letter should be a small letter, all the other suceeding word's first letter should be a capital letter. 
Example:greensTechnology

10.What is mean by class,method,object?
Class:
------
  
Class is a collection of objects and methods
Class contains attributes(variables and methods) that are common to all the objects created in a class.
Method:
-------

Method defines the set of action to be performed.

Object:
-------

Object is the run time memory allocation.
Using object we call any methods.

11.What is mean by Encapsulation?
It is the structure of creating folders.
It wraps the data and code acting on data together in to a single unit.
Example of encapsulation is POJO class.
It is otherwise called Data hiding.

12.What are the datatypes used in java?
byte 
short 
int 
long
float
double
boolean 
char 
String

13.What is byte size and range of int datatypes?
Size of byte is 1 byte (8 bit)
Range formula =[-2^(n-1)] to [(2^(n-1))-1] for int n=32

14.What is mean by Wrapper class?
Classes of data types is called wrapper class.
It is used to convert any data type into an object.
All classes and wrapper classes default value is null.

15.What is the main use of Scanner class?
To get the inputs from the user at the run time.

16.What are the methods available in Scanner Class?
nextByte();
nextShort();
nextInt();
nextLong();
   nextFloat();
nextDouble();
next().charAt(0);
next();
nextLine();
nextBoolean();

17.What is mean by inheritance?
Accessing one class Properties in another class without multiple object creation.
It avoids time and memory wastage.
It ensures code reusability

18.What are the ways to access the methods /data from another class?
We can access the another class methods either by creating object or using extends keyword.
 
19.What is mean by polymorphism?
Poly-many.
Morphism-forms.
Taking more than one forms is called polymorphism or one task implemented in many ways.


20.What are the difference between method overloading and overriding?


Method overloading(static binding/compile time polymorphism):
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When we have multiple methods with same method name but differs only based on its datatype,datatype count and order.

Class-name
Method-same
Argument-differ based on datatype,order,number
Method overriding(dynamic binding/run time polymorphism):
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
When you are not satisfied with the logic of your super class method,you can create the same method(with exact same
method name) in your sub-class and you can write your required business logic.When you create object for sub-class,sub class 
method only will get executed.so here child class method overriding parent class method.

Class name-differ(using extends)
Method-same
Argument-same

21.What are the types of inheritance?
Single Inheritance
Multilevel Inheritance
Multiple Inheritance
Hybrid Inheritance
Hierarchical Inheritance

22.Why multiple inheritance is not supported in java?
Compilation error/syntax error-After extends keyword we can mention only one classname( , not allowed)
Priority problem-When multiple parent classes has methods with same name and arguments,compiler will not know 
which method should be called.

23.What are the difference between Multiple and Multilevel inheritance?


Multiple inheritance:
-------------------------

More than one parent class directly supporting into same child class.
Multiple inheritance not supported in java due to Compilation problem and priority problem
We have achieve multiple inheritance in java through interface.

Multilevel inheritance:
-----------------------

More than one parent class supporting into one child class in tree level structure.
It is supported in java

24.What is mean by access specifier?
It defines the scope or level of access for variables,methods and classes

25.What are the difference between public and protected?
 

    Public:
-------

It is global level access( same package + different package).
Protected:
------------

can access Inside package ( object creation + extends )

26.What is mean by Abstraction?
Hiding the implementation part or business logic is called abstraction.

27.What are the types of Abstraction?
1. Partially abstraction(using abstract class).
2. Fully abstraction(using interface).

28.Can we create Object for Abstract class?
No, we cant create object for abstract class.

29.What is mean by Interface?

It will support only abstract method(without business logic), won't support non abstract method(method with business logic)
In interface "public abstract" is default.
using "implements" keyword we can implement the interface in a class where we can write the business logic for all
unimplemented methods.

30.What are the difference between Abstract and Interface?


Abstract class:
-----------------

Using Abstract class,we can acheive partial abstraction.
It support both abstract method and non-abstract method.
using "extends" keyword you can inherit an abstract class.
For any abstract method we need to mention "public abstract".
Interface:
-----------

Using interface,we can acheive full abstraction.
It supports only abstract method.
It is using "implements" keyword.
"public Abstract" is default, no need to mention it explicitly.